+++
title = "What's this about?"
description = "A description of my projects on GitHub"
date = 2026-05-16
modified = 2026-05-16
+++

# A description of my projects on GitHub

Of course a GitHub pages personal site, at least in my case, should be something illustrating my own projects that live here on GitHub, and maybe showing my comments on anything interesting I found while lurking around the repositories.

As a matter of the projects I am mostly working on at the time are the following:

* [**When**](https://github.com/almostearthling/when-command), and
* [**whenever**](https://github.com/almostearthling/whenever),

the latter being the evolution of the first one, and the first one having become a mere frontend for **whenever**.


## When

**When** used to be an automation tool mostly aimed at _Ubuntu_ workstations: that was my desktop environment until some years ago, and I actually needed something to run background jobs in an easy way that shouldn't consist in updating the _crontab_ and write complex scripts. **When** was really developed with _Ubuntu_ in mind: it used _Gtk_ natively to blend with the desktop environment, many of the events that it could handle were specific to the distribution. Some people managed to make it work on other distros, but part of the functionality was not available. When I switched to Windows, the development of **When** slowed down, mostly because it was quite hard to catch up with the changes in the environment (especially _DBus_ interfaces) in order to be compatible with new releases that I was not actively using.

On Windows I tried to use the builtin _Task Scheduler_ which, in fact, is not a bad tool: when I first started the development of **When**, it was because Linux lacked such an UI tool and just relied on _cron_, which, moreover, only takes time into account to schedule jobs. However, the _Task Scheduler_ is a system management tool on Windows, it relies on the _system management console_, and, in some of its parts, is quirky and overly difficult to use. After a few years I started missing **When**, and decided to revive it.

**When** was (and still is) written in _Python_.


## whenever

I already had in mind to separate the core of **When** from its UI, in order to make it easier to adapt to other Linux distributions while maintaining all of its features. Also, I wanted to remove all the hardcoded _DBus_ interface reference, and only have _DBus_ listeners (or inspection calls) that could be configured for specific platforms: in **When** all of the variants for an event or a call that involved _DBus_ had to be kept, in order to support subsequent releases of _Ubuntu_ (not to mention other distributions): this was a thorn in one's side, because it messed up the code, and made the program bigger in the memory, and event slower to some extent. And the icing on the cake was, that the new interfaces were not easy to discover in the first place.

After I discovered _Rust_, it was quite an easy choice to implement **whenever** using it: **whenever**, being the separate core of **When** that I was aiming at, could be more lightweight than in _Python_, and faster at the same time. And, possibly, could be cross-platform and support Windows as well. Of course it wasn't as easy to implement all the features that were available in the old **When**, and it wasn't easy to cope with nontrivial things (such as event listeners) in _Rust_. At the end, however, after some initial difficulties, **whenever** was born and grew up, to satisfy all the goals that I had in mind:

* being agnostic with respect to the available _DBus_ interfaces
* all the basic conditions, available in the old release of **When**, that trigger tasks and jobs
* lightweightness and stability in terms of resource consumption, for both CPU and RAM
* support for both Windows and Linux (Mac might be supported as well, but I don't have a Mac so I don't know)
* speed.

**whenever** (with a lowercase _w_) has even more features than the old **When**: it sports a builtin _Lua_ interpreter, can listen to _WMI_ on Windows, can inspect _DBus_ and _WMI_ in addition to listening to events. It is also more flexible in handling spawned processes. The only thing it lacks is an UI. But there is **When** for that: while maintaining a surface (which is platform independent btw) very similar to the previous UI/UX, and while implementing most of the system-specific features as configurations, it just manages its **whenever** core in a consistent way across the supported platforms.


## Other stuff

Of course I have been working on other projects, but at the time I am not following them so closely: some projects, such as [PyCLIPS](https://github.com/almostearthling/pyclips), may have lost some usefulness because of the advent of LLMs that, without any strict context definition (which is needed in fact/rule based inference systems), almost achieve the same results. Even though rule-based inference systems are deterministic, it looks like people, nowadays, are OK with quite fuzzy results, and are content as well when the machine infers something without them providing a coherent set of constraints. This new "mentality" made me less interested in inference systems and therefore abandon the _PyCLIPS_ project. Nevertheless, there are some interesting forks that make the original project compatible with current toools and current versions of the code base.
